alfred korzybski

The map is the territory
Bernhard Siegert
When I read the expression ‘The map is not the
territory’ for the first time, it occurred to me that it
contained the quintessence of Anglo-American philosophy
of common sense. The defiant insistence on a
logic of representation, a common-sense belief in the
evidence of an objective ‘reality’ that is prior to all
mental representations or written marks, a normative
concept of rigour and scientism – all that appeared
to be condensed in that one expression, which Alfred
Korzybski coined in a paper on the ‘Necessity for
Rigor in Mathematics and Physics’ in 1931, and which
can be seen as an emblem of analytical philosophy.
Certainly, I do not intend to start an argument like the
one that Jacques Derrida once had with John Searle.
And I will certainly not address the historical issue of
the divide between the continental and the analytical
traditions of philosophy, which according to Michael
Friedman can be traced back to the clash between
Heidegger and Carnap in the early 1930s. I only wish
to use the expression of Korzybski, who was a partisan
of Carnap, to point out the media-philosophical impact
of Cultural Technologies and Techniques Studies,
which have constituted a new and rapidly expanding
field of research and teaching in Germany for about a
dozen years now. The media-philosophical core of this
field of research can be seen as the unfolding of the
possible meanings of negating Korzybski’s negation,
namely that ‘the map is the territory’.
One of the possible meanings of this sentence can
be found in those maps that were invented by Lewis
Carroll and Jorge Luís Borges: maps of a territory
or an empire in the scale of 1 : 1. In Lewis Carroll’s
Sylvie and Bruno Concluded a German professor
tells the story of how the map-makers of Germany
had experimented with the use of always larger maps,
until they finally produced a map of the scale of 1 : 1.
‘It has never been spread out, yet’, said the professor.
‘The farmers objected: they said it would cover the
whole country, and shut out the sunlight! So we now
use the country itself, as its own map, and I assure
you it does nearly as well.’1 Borges’s text ‘Del rigor
en la ciencia’ tells of an empire in which the art of
map-making had reached such a degree of perfection
that the cartographic institutes were content only with
a map of the empire that had the size of the empire and
was congruent with it in each of its points. In the end,
the map and the empire became indiscernible.2 But it
is not this interpretation of the sentence ‘the map is
the territory’ that is relevant for an understanding of
the media-philosophical core of the concept of cultural
techniques. As cultural techniques, maps are not just
representations of a territory. First, they can also be
representations of the ocean. It is hard for logicians
to keep in mind that there is an ocean where all
kinds of contradictions are gathered together and the
tertium is not non datur but given. Second, maps are
not just representations but also instruments. They are
based on mathematical operations and they constitute
a substantial part of a cultural practice.
A main feature of the analysis of maps as cultural
technologies is that it considers maps not as representations
of space but as spaces of representation.3
The historicity that is of interest, in the first place, in
connection with those spatial representations is not the
historicity of the represented spaces. Instead it is the
historicity of the space of representation itself.
From the perspective of Cultural Studies, as well
as from the perspective of the Study of Cultural Technologies
and Techniques, maps contain less information
about a territory than about the way it is observed and
described. But the hermeneutic or cognitive approach
that is predominant in Cultural Studies reads the map
as a key to the understanding of the intentions of those
who produced the image of the world that is displayed
by the map.4 Hence, understanding maps means here
to understand the intentions – the conscious and unconscious
dispositions – of the authors of the maps,
their ‘world-view’. In contrast to this reading method,
the media-philosophical approach inherent in the study
of cultural technologies and techniques reads maps as
media that are themselves agents of subject constitution.
The marks and signs on a map do not refer to
an authorial subject but to epistemic orders and their
struggles for dominance over other epistemic orders,
in the course of which marks and things enter a new
play of signs. The cartographic operations produce a
14
subject, which correlates to them. Such an approach
does not consider a map as a representation in two
ways: neither in the sense of a denotation, nor in the
sense of a reflection of the cultural predisposition of
an authorial subject. It is instead concerned with the
way changes in cartographic procedures give rise to
various orders of representation. Instead of representing
cultural predispositions, it is their very basis of
production. What is used for interpretation in the
approach of hermeneutics and Cultural Studies is
that which needs to be interpreted in the approach of
Cultural Techniques and Technologies Studies. Representation
is not presupposed but is itself a historical
event, which appears at a certain date in the history
of cartographic orders. Maps thus appear as sources of
a history of representation and not as representations
in a history of intentions and their cultural conditions.
The concept of cultural techniques is not ‘postmedia’
in the sense that it is designed to replace
the concept of the media, or in the sense that in the
age of digital media artworks transcend the Greenbergian
dogma of media specificity. But it is ‘postnew-
media’ in the sense that it suggests we interpret
Media Studies as something completely different from
Internet Studies or Mass Media Studies. It attempts to
turn Media Studies into ‘Medium Studies’ in so far
as it calls for a ‘physics of media’. It is designed to
set a new perspective on media or mediums: namely,
to relate the concept of media/mediums historically
to ontological and aesthetic operations that process
distinctions (and the blurring of distinctions) which are
basic to the sense production of any specific culture.
Cultural techniques, media studies
In nineteenth-century Germany, the term ‘cultural technologies’
signified what in the English language was
called ‘agricultural engineering’: river regulations for
instance, but also techniques of breeding and domesticating
animals. In the 1970s it was related to elementary
techniques of education: reading, writing, calculating.
When the concept of cultural techniques re-emerged
in the context of Media Studies and German Kulturwissenschaft
shortly before the turn of the new century
it was based on a post-humanistic understanding of
culture. Thus, its spectrum could be expanded (for
instance, to calendar techniques, techniques of jurisdiction,
or techniques of trance and the sacred) and,
in addition, it could find a systematic place in the
context of history of science, legal history, art history,
cultural anthropology and ethnology, inasmuch as those
disciplines were themselves effected by the ‘cultural
turn’. What was left out systematically were the big
explanatory models of a history of ideas or a philosophy
of history: the progress of the individual and humanity
and freedom, on the side of idealism; economic crises
and revolutions, on the side of materialism.
The concept of cultural techniques thereby took
up a feature that had been specific to German media
theory since the 1980s. This specific feature set apart
German media studies from Anglo-American media
studies, as well as from French and German studies of
communications – let alone sociology, which, under the
spell of enlightenment, in principle wanted to consider
media only with respect to the public. German media
analysis placed at the basis of changes in cultural
and intellectual history inconspicuous techniques of
knowledge like card indexes, media of pedagogy like
the slate, discourse operators like quotation marks,
uses of the phonograph in phonetics, or techniques of
forming the individual like practices of teaching to
read and write. Thus media, symbolic operators and
practices were selected out, which are today systematically
related to each other by the concept of cultural
techniques. The philosophical specificity of German
media analysis was that it took up Michel Foucault’s
concept of the historical a priori and turned it into
a ‘technical a priori’ by referring the Foucauldian
‘archive’ to media technologies.
While in communication studies, sociological
methods played a predominant role, in German media
studies there was a link established between media
and changes in knowledge and perception. More precisely,
it was not so much the question of what was
15
represented in the media, and how it was represented,
and why it was represented in one way and not in
another, that came into focus – since questions like
these lead always to the same answers. Content analysis
of media products will always reproduce the same
highly predictable results, because it will always find
what it already knows that it is to be found there. A
Marxist will always discover the commodity form of
contents, and a fan of Cultural Studies will always find
race, class and gender as the cultural semantics which
govern those contents. In contrast to content analysis,
parts of German media theory shifted the focus from
the representation of meaning to the conditions of representation.
The question is not how the map interprets
the objective territory it represents, but what techniques
of representation it uses and how those techniques of
representation were part of power relations, and how
the very concept of the territory is related to those
techniques and those power relations. The whole question
of representation was shifted towards the question
of the conditions of representation. These conditions
are not at all exclusively technical a prioris but involve
the materiality of media in the broadest sense, including
their technicality, discourse networks, cultural
techniques and formations of knowledge.
The concept of cultural techniques highlights the
operations or sequences of operations that historically
and logically precede the media concepts generated
by them. However, although an operation like counting
could be processed purely by means of a bodily
technique, in the sense of Marcel Mauss, it nevertheless
always presupposes technical objects (be it one’s own
fingers), which predetermine the performance of the
operation and thus the concepts derived from that
operation. Calculation by means of an abacus gives
rise to another concept of number than calculating
with one’s ten fingers, and the paper surface and the
computer to yet other concepts of number.
The media-philosophical core of the study of cultural
techniques and technologies therefore consists of
a vehement criticism of an ontological conception of
philosophical terms. Instead, the study of cultural techniques
aims at revealing the operative basis of those
terms. There is no ‘man’ independent from cultural
techniques of hominization, or anthropotechnics; there
is no time independent from the cultural techniques
of calendars, time measurement and synchronization;
there is no space independent from cultural techniques
of ruling spaces and so forth. This does not imply,
however, that writing the history of cultural techniques
is meant to be an anti-ontological project. On the
contrary, it implies more than it excludes a historical
ontology, which however does not base that which
exists in ideas, adequate reasons or an eidos, as was
common in the tradition of metaphysics, but in media
operations, which work as conditions of possibility
for artefacts, knowledge, the production of political or
aesthetic or religious actants.
The map is the territory inasmuch as, for instance,
map-making is a cultural technique that, in the service
of the state, produced the territory as a political
reality. Let me use the example of one of the most
famous maps in art history to elaborate in just one
aspect of the Cultural Techniques approach: the map
in Johannes Vermeer’s Allegory of Painting (1665–67,
oil on canvas, Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna).
Vermeer’s map
On the wall of the painter’s study we see a map of the
Netherlands, which displays on the right side (north)
the seven Protestant provinces and on the left (south)
the ten provinces that stayed under the rule of the
Spanish Habsburgs. The map that Vermeer displays
here was created by Claes Jansz Visscher and was
published some time after 1652.
The metaphysics of space that lie at the basis of the
truism ‘that the map is not the territory’ originate from
the cultural technique of perspectival image construction,
in which line rules over colour, and the surface
over the materiality of flatness. Linear perspective is
biased to support the conception that technical distinctions
between the eye and the imaginary space, abstract
space and image objects, are embodiments of the
metaphysical distinctions between res extensa and res
cogitans, idea and matter (as happened in Florentine
16
disegno theory during the sixteenth century). Although
Vermeer was a painter who widely used perspectival
machines like the camera obscura, his thematization
of the image surface defines the image in a completely
different way than did Leon Battista Alberti. As the
concept of representation is rooted in the principles
of linear perspective, it can be described as a historic
version of hylomorphism. Following Gilbert Simondon,
Deleuze and Guattari postulated in A Thousand Plateaus
what they called nomadic science as an alternative
to hylomorphism, and I think that the way Media
Philosophy is analysing the way image spaces operate
with the help of cultural techniques can be described
within the conceptual framework of nomadic science.
Hylomorphism is the name for a metaphysical
relationship between form and matter that goes back
to Aristotle, in which it is the form alone to which
is ascribed the idea, action and being. Matter does
not matter in terms of what is essentially needed for
the being to be. Already, early Dutch painters like
Van Eyck challenged this model of hylomorphism by
favouring another model, in which the pictorial ground
does not appear as passive but as possessing a potential
which has always already initiated a becoming form,
which is realized by operations like folding, weaving
or braiding. It is essential for this other model that the
operations that allow the matter to become form are
inherent in the structure of the matter; they belong to
the matter; they are expressions of the matter itself.
In the model of hylomorphism all matter is assigned
to the content while form is completely turned into
expression. But in a media-philosophical conception of
content and expression, each of the two terms embrace
form and matter. Matter here appears as a medium
of singularities. With regard to the map in Vermeer’s
Allegory of Painting, the surface which represents
the pictorial ground of an image is not a geometrical
construction, but some kind of textile matter, which
is the medium of folds and bends and bubbles of
colours. ‘The expression, too, is not just formal, but is
inextricably connected with structural features which
form a matter of expression.’5
With regard to the map in Vermeer’s Allegory
of Painting, the painted object is not exterior to the
medium of the image, but it is connected to it in a
recursive way, as it is in the case of the ornament,
which refers to the structure of the pictorial ground,
which it translates into a motive. The mediality of the
image in Vermeer does not separate technique and
motive; on the contrary, the technique is thematized by
the motive. The painted ocean on the map in Vermeer’s
painting displays the structure of the canvas it is
painted on, and the painted waves repeat and thematize
these structures, which connect the art of painting to
the art of weaving. The painted ships sail over the folds
of the pictorial ground, and the shadows which they
cast on the painted ocean interfere with the shadow
which the fold is casting on the ocean. Or is it on the
canvas? What is the difference between these shadows?
Are they not both painted shadows, are they not both
painted on one and the same canvas? As the contours
of the territory define the map as striated space, the
structure of the canvas, the ornamental recursivity of
motive and technique, the folds and bubbles, which
reflect the light, turn the whole map into an ocean, into
the smooth space par excellence. The map is the territory.
In this case this means that as the materiality of
the map interferes with its contents, and as the medium
of representation interferes with the representation of
the territory (for which representation is an ontological
condition), the map as a representation is deterritorialized
by the map as a medium.


On Exactitude in Science
Jorge Luis Borges, Collected Fictions, translated by Andrew Hurley. In that Empire, the Art of Cartography attained such Perfection that the map of a
single Province occupied the entirety of a City, and the map of the Empire, the entirety
of a Province. In time, those Unconscionable Maps no longer satisfied, and the
Cartographers Guilds struck a Map of the Empire whose size was that of the Empire, and
which coincided point for point with it. The following Generations, who were not so
fond of the Study of Cartography as their Forebears had been, saw that that vast Map
was Useless, and not without some Pitilessness was it, that they delivered it up to the
Inclemencies of Sun and Winters. In the Deserts of the West, still today, there are
Tattered Ruins of that Map, inhabited by Animals and Beggars; in all the Land there is
no other Relic of the Disciplines of Geography.
—Suarez Miranda,Viajes de varones prudentes, Libro IV,Cap. XLV, Lerida, 1658



